title: About the MHCMS
sub-title: Why use irritating CMS admin portals when you have a text editor on your computer?
tags: mhcms, product, npm, nodejs
authors: Antoine, Jagaimox
---

# TLDR

This blog post explains the basics of using MHCMS, the Minimal Headless Content Management System.
It does not do much, but it's far from enough for many simple blog use cases.
MHCMS does not need any database: it only needs to parse files in folders. It has been built with S3 in mind, but it can be extended for any file storage system I guess.
It is not built with speed in mind: I strongly advise using some caching system in order to prevent reduce the number of read operations.

# Basic Syntax

It uses markdown with headers. MHCMS can further structure the content, but by using a "schema-on-read" approach.

## The File name

The file should be named `YYYYMMDD_Short-title-in-kebab-case.md` where

- `YYYYMMDD` is the date of publication e.g. `20230811`
  Files are considered public only from the date. This allows to delay posting
- `Short-title-in-kebab-case` is a short title often used for quick listing

Given a `root` folder, the file tree must be either:

- a flat structure
```
+ root/
  index.yaml
  YYYYMMDD_Some-title.md
```
- or organized with published and draft subfolders
  note that the naming of folders is open, but `published` and `drafts` are a good start
```
+ root/
  index.yaml
  + published/
    YYYYMMDD_Some-title.md
  + drafts/
    YYYYMMDD_Some-title.md
```

MHCMS does not support sub-subfolders, but your website can define as many roots are required.

The file `index.csv` is not mandatory, but can speed up data retrieval if present.
It can be generated automatically using some tooling in MHCMS.
It must contain the data below:

```
published:
  - date: YYYYMMDD
    short-title: The short title from the file name, converted from the kebab case
    title: The name as specified inside the `markdown` file (if present)
    sub-title: The subtitle from the markdown file (if present)
	tags: [ "tag", "from", "md file", "if present" ]
	authors: [ "Authors", "From Md. File", "If Present" ]
	key: other key/values from the `markdown` headers
  - ...
drafts:
  - ...
```

## The Headers

The headers are key/values:

- the keys are converted from kebab-case to camelCase
- spaces around keys and values are stripped
- it supports comments: everything after `;;` is ignored
- the header ends with a row with three or more hyphens

On read, it is possible to further structure the keys. The client supports dates and comma-separated lists.

If set, some header keys are natively parsed by the system: title, sub-title, tags, authors.

# The Content

The content is plain markdown, with a twist: it is possible to do some parsing on read:

- `iterateSections()` will separate at the next-level headings
  It will split at `#` first, then at `##`, and so on.
  It is important for the markdown to be well-formed
- `iterateParagraphs()` will separate blocks of text separated by an empty line.
  if a paragraph is a block of `mhcms-yaml`, the content will be parsed and structured to a Javascript object.
  
The `mhcms-yaml` sections allow adding special objects to the document (e.g. buttons)
It is up to the client to process these special objects. Below is an example of such:

```mhcms-yaml
widget: button
main-type: signin
sub-type: create-account
```

# The Client

The typescript client requires at least read access to the S3 bucket.
If you access at the GUI side (not recommended), the best is to use a publicly readable bucket.
On the backend side, you can use your AWS credentials. In the case you also have write access, you can also use the generation function for the index file.

## Read-Only Features

```
const mhcms = new MhcmsClient({
	s3: {
		bucketName: "my-bucket",
		region: "moon-north-pole",
		accessKey: "not so secret",
		secretKey: "very secret"
	}
});
let mhcmsFolder = mhcms.indexFolder("/cms/my-blog");
const { posts, totalNumberOfPosts } = mhcmsFolder.listPosts({
  folders: [ "published", "drafts" ], // "publish" folder by default, or root if no sub-folder
  before: Date | null, // null by default
  after: Date | null, // null by default
  offset: number, // 0 by dfault
  limit: number, // 10 by default
  tags: [ "tag1", "tag2" ], // and filter
  authors: [ "author2", "author2" ] // and filter
  sortKey: "date" // "date" by default, can be null
  sortDirection: "ascending" // "descending" by default
});
if (mhcmsFolder.isIndexOutdated()) {
  mhcmsFolder = mhcms.indexFolder("/cms/my-blog");
}
```